> Manglam Bhavaan Vishnu, manglam Garddhvza ;
>
> Manglam Pundrikashya, manglaya tano Hairih.

## Welcome

A very warm welcome and thanks for your kind participation in this "Spiritual" ceremony.  What we are trying to do  here is kinda bring some good vibes and inspirations from some of the oldest  `Sanskrit` poetry, and also adapt the intent to a somewhat modern perspective. I will give you a little more context in next couple of minutes and thereafter we have recital of seven Vaidik verses. 

## Thanks

Before I lay out the context, I have special thanks for Henry's family, and freinds, for hosting us here in beautiful South of France - Montpellier. 

I also want to thank all the international travelers who have flown across timezones to be here in person. Your presence makes it even more beautiful. 

I also want to applaud the bride and the groom, Doctor Aakriti and Doctor Henry, two scientists, for showing keen interest in our spiritual traditions. This interest indicates that our traditions and our values are in the foundations of science. So cogratulations to both of you - Aakriti and Henry -  and also thanks for entrusting this important ceremoney to me and Huges.

## Context

When we started thinking about this wedding, at the outset, we all wanted a spiritual ceremony. Huges follow Swami Praznapada as his spiritual Guru. Both Henry and Aakriti supported the idea. In addition they wanted the ceremony to be meaningful and succinct. The curious quetion then was to tailor a befitting ceremony that truly  represented this beautiful cross cultural union. 

The obvious rationale was to look at the Vaidik scriptures - because being among the oldest written documents, they are beyond any religion, race or color. They are by default spritual - just like this beautiful unification of two cultures.

When I looked up, I found in `Rig Veda`, the oldest of four `Vedas`, there is a complete chapter dedicated to the ritual of wedding - `Paani grahna` as we call it in `Sanskrit`. It describes a wedding through an example. The `Paanigrahana` ceremony of the Moon  `Soma` with Sun's daughter `Surya` -  two mythical characters. The wedding procession that you saw earlier this afternoon, bears it's roots in this chapter of `Rig Veda`. When `Soma` went to seek `Surya's` hand in marriage, his friends and family celebrated the occasion, dancing around their chariot. It is almost seven thousand years old tradition - give or take!

So, I have chosen few verses from this primordial wedding. A wedding registered in `Rigveda` itself. The first fully documented wedding.  And I have taken the liberty to add few of my own choices. I hope you will find them relevant. 

## Process

The way we are going to do it is, I will request `Huges` to provide a quick synopsis for the French audience,  and then I will recite the verses with English translation. We will also request the bride and the groom to take a circle of the candles with each verse. The circle around the fire has a deeper meaning ..  but for now its a signature. Its a signature that both the bride and the groom fully understand , appreciate and approve the recital. After seven circles of auspecious bonds, the bride and the groom will have their vows, in their own words, to transition into the role of a "husband" and a "wife"! Thereafter we will have `Huges` talk about the five secrets of a successsful modern matrimony based on `Vaidik` principles taught to him by Swami Paznapada.

## Logistics stuff

< Check for questions> Let people know to get a bottle of water or beverage of their choice . Also toilets are right at the entrance of the chatau in case any one needs to go.

If there are no questions, let us get started with your kind blessings.

### Invocation 

Aakriti and Henry, we all have come together here for your transition into the role of husband and wife. This first verse is a wish from all of us present here for this beautiful union at this beautiful location. 

It says

> Ihemavindra Samnudam Chakravakev Dampati;
>
> Prajyouno Swastikou Vismayurvya Ashnutaam.

O Lord, may you bring this couple together, like a pair of `Charavaka` birds. `Chakravaka` is a duck. In India we call it a `Brahmini` duck. Which means a sacred duck.

So Hey lord, please bring this couple together like a pair of `Chakravaka` ducks. Let them enjoy the marital bliss and live a long life along with their progeny. Their kids , and of course their pets :-)

> Tip - May involve the audience (optional) - Since it is a wish from all of us, I would need a representative of the audience to say these words with me. Any volunteers ? Have someone represent as a member of the audience to repeat the verse. And then seek acceptance from Aakriti and Henry and ask the to take a circle of the fire while  chanting the `Mantra`

Henry should go first as he already brought a pet this union. 

> Well begun is half done. Stage a time check. 

### What is Paanigrahana.

Talking about traditions, wedding - or `Paanigrahna` , as we call it `Sanskrit`, is one of the oldest and among the most sacred tradition ... in almost all the culture. Since it is a universal tradition, it is by definition, spiritual. Spirituality is something that goes beyond, the man made differences.  Something omnipresent across all the cultures. Thus weddings are, by definition,  spiritual events. The word `Paani grahna` aptly captures this essence. It simply means two partners, accepting each other's hand. Two partners holding each other's hand, irrespective of their orientations or affiliations - boneded with spiritual love.

So this next verse is bride's expression of `पानिगरहणा`. She says ..

> Dhairham Prithvitvam;
>
> Raitoham, raitobritvam;
>
> Manohamsmi Vaaktvam;
>
> Saamasmi Rikarvam;
>
> Sa Mam, Anuvrata bhav.

It is beautiful `Sanskrit` poetry and the meaning is equally powerful. It means

I am the sky, you are the earth;

I radiate energy and you hold it to manifest things in this physical world;

I am the thought (`Mana`) and you are the words. 

I am `Saama` the music, and you are `Rika` the song

I and you follow each other. 


So Aakriti, if you understood the meaning of `Paani Granhna`, then you may lead  Henry for a circle around the fire.

----

The third verse is bride's expression of Trust in this union. 

The idea of spiritual love, `Paanigrahna` is even more relevent for this wedding because this wedding not only goes beyond the man made differences, it brings two of the most ancient cultures together bridging West and the East. When I started thinking about the differences, I found there are more similarities between Frence and Indian cultures than what appears on the surface. India is a culture of "color" - as you can see in the colors of our clothes. France is a culture of "Style". French poise compliments Indian vibrance. But more importantly both the cultures evoke a unique sense of spirituality. And they deem families are the cradles to these beautiful spiritual emotions. Emotions of love, care, respect and sacrifice .. and trust. They also believe that weddings are the gateways to the families.

This verse expresses the Trust that underpins a family. Written by `Maharishi Vasishtha` , it is one of my favorite. 

The bride says

> Tat Chakshuh Devhitam, Shukram Uccharta;
>
> Pashyema Shardah Shatam, Jeevema Shardah Shatam.

Your foresight , your auspecious vision of this union is bright and rising.

May we see it together for hundred years. May we live together for hundred years.


So Aakriti, this trust also brings hope. It is not about the past - it is about what you two can be in next ten years. What you can accomplish together in next hundred years.. You may take Henry around for a circle of fire with this hopefulness and trust.

----

Having moved with bride's expression of Trust, the groom now makes worldly commitments. In the fourth verse he says

> Dharmecha Arthecha Kaamecha, Imam Naticharami;
>
> Dharmecha Arthecha Kaamecha, Imum Naticharami.

In my Duties (`Dharmecha`), In my finacial responsibilities (`Arthecha`) and in my physical needs (`Kaamecha`), I will always consult you. I will actively seek and act based on your consensus.

So Henry, you now know who to talk to before you buy the next video game ! or look to invest another fortune in a new Guitar! If you are down with these commits , you may lead Aakroti for a circle of fire.

---

And also moved with bride's expression of spiritual love, the groom thanks the Gods for this good fortune. He thanks the deities for bringing the bride to his life. He says ..

> Gribhnami te Soubhagstvay, Hastam Maya Patya Jardishtirysthasa;
>
> Bhago Aryama Savita Purandhir Mayama Tva Durgahptyay Devah.

I thank the deities of enjoyment (Bhaga) , deity of wisdom (Aryama) and the deity of the creative force (Savitaru) for bringing you in my life. Not only these deities , I thank the entire universe `Purandhir` a name of `Bramha` , for the good fortune of being together till we get very very old - or till death do us apart.

----

The sixth verse is the celebration of companionship. They wish not to lose this friendship even if they lose everything else. 

> Sakha Saptpada Bhav;
>
> Sakhayou Saptpada Babhoove;
>
> Sakhyam Te Gameyam
>
> Sakyat te Mayosham
>
> Sakhyanme Mayoshthah

Oh friend we are taking seven steps together.

Having gotten the taste of your company, I am enchanted with the magic of your companionship.

It's you who I always talk about. Your conversations are always on my lips.

Please never let me stay away from your company.

# Conclude

